Warning

This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of Trinity College in
accordance with section 113P of the Copyright Act 1968 (the Act).

The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further

reproduction or communication of this material by you may be the subject of copyright protection
under the Act.

Do not remove this notice.

Reference

23AST-E2 August standard second essay
Locke, J., (1988). Two Treaties of Government. Cambridge University Press

NOTE: THIS CITATION MAY CONTAIN ERRORS. ALWAYS CHECK FOR ACCURACY BEFORE
INCLUDING IN YOUR WORK


Series editors

RAYMOND GEUSS
Reader in Philosophy, University of | Cambridge

QUENTIN SKINNER
Regius Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge

Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought is now firmly
established as the major student textbook series in political theory. It aims
to make available co students all the most important texts in the history of
western political thought, from ancient Greece to the early twentieth
century. All the familiar classic texts will be included, but the series seeks at
the same time to enlarge the conventional canon by incorporating an
extensive range of less well-known works, many of them never before
available in a modern English edition. Wherever possible, texts are published
in complete and unabridged form, and translations are specially commis-
sioned for the series. Each volume contains a critical introduction together
with chronologies, biographical sketches, a guide to further reading and any
necessary glossaries and textual apparatus. When completed, the series will
aim to offer an outline of the entire evolution of western political thought.

For alist of titles published in the series, please see end of book

i
ul]
{
|

JOHN LOCKE

Two Treatises o yf
Government

EDITED WITH
AN INTRODUCTION
AND NOTES BY

PETER LASLETT

Fellow of Trinity College,
Cambridge

STUDENT EDITION \

CAMBRIDGE

UNIVERSITY PRESS



PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
‘The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa

htp:/wwwcambridge.org
© Cambridge University Press 1960, 1967, 1988

This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.

First published 1960
Reprinted with amendments 1963, 1994
Reprinted 1966
Second edition 1967
Reprinted with amendments 1970
Reprinted 1980, 1988
Student edition 1988
Fifteenth printing 2004

Paperback edition first published by
New American Library 1965
and reprinted several times

Printed in the United Kingdom ar the University Press, Cambridge

British Library Cataloguing in Publication data
Locke, John 1632-1704
Two treatises of government. — Student edn —
(Cambridge texts in the history of political chought).
1. Political science
I. Tide I. Laslett, Peter
320.01 JA71

Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Locke, John, 1632-1704.
‘Two treatises of government / John Locke:
edited with an introduction and notes
by Peter Laslett.-Studentedn sp. cm.
(Cambridge texts in the history of political chought).
Bibliography.
Includes index.
ISBN 052135448 X ISBN 0521 357306 (pbk)

1. Political science —Early works to 1800. 2. Liberty.
T.Laslete, Peter. Il. Title. Ill. Series.
JC153.18 1988
320-de19 87-33783

ISBN 0 521 35448 X hardback
ISBN 0 521 35730 6 paperback

AMICIS SUIS
AAS. AS.
JP.C. N.JM.
WGR.  W.J.LP.
MAIL MCMLVIII
IN STATU PUPILLARI


INTRODUCTION

i i Ossess
ourselvesas God’s workmanship, we ae that S _ - =
it to us, and therefore a
son because he gave 1 , a
— unreasonably is to that se an rem ae dia
ifically, any man who seeks to ‘
ted as such. Specifically, : : : a ae
na his power, under his will, denying that this other Pers ec
free as he is because he too possesses reason, = se = ‘i wel
that reason is the rule between men, that man OE —-
be destroied by the injured person and the rest of man} 7 os ea
ther wild beast, or noxious brute that is destructiv
oO >
a lee hink it somewhat crude.
isi i nd we may think! nat Cr
isisa drasticargument, a ; i
It me to spell out in thick, black letters case ea in
belief that reason is the mode of co-operation at
reason, he had just said, is ‘the common bond csc y a
kind isunited into one fellowship and societie’. Itis " some
tatement, but a recurrent repetitive theme, perhaps pee a
derail as i later insertion (see note on II, §r 72) lex _ pone
Locke’s account of the maintenance of justice a - C pemantl
organized society. It may be a — ee o~
] relationships
sequences to the actua’ : a a
aes Gil philosophy of Hobbes, for rape = ; a.
: triarch, did subordinate all human wills to one will, it een
ne overnment a matter of will, therefore it did treat bara
ek and anyone pretending to its rights and ee - cpu
treated as a beast. But the actual object which he geste =
on 5 to have been much more personal and politica fg rere
ar es presenting this argument are examined ae a ms = “
od oe Stuart fit easily enough into a role © . <i va
i hom Men can have n ¢
Savage Beasts, with w! 1 lie’
Security" * for they had tried to rule England ~ —
the Hobbesian, then certainly of the patriarcha oP a ital
In perfect freedom, equal to each other, capable oe
-operate w:
i le to understand and co-op:
behaviour and so ab! ee ere
i rn. It must be empha
er, that is how we are bo’ mpt edt a
pie this way, bond or free, savage or civilized, — oi
side society or the state, for it is a truly universal doc!
i he
* 1, § 11, 25-6. This is a reference to an paren ee es = ieee 7 bee
¥ .d in the final text of 11, § 172, 16. ‘
last phrase also appeare

e's country, ani
and 172 is clearly the estab! ished government of a country, Locke’: . d
he the words oe it when it claims the right to ‘Absolute, Arbitrary
these are

Power’ (‘Having quitted Reason’ to do so).

96

THE SOVEREIGNTY OF REASON

Locke and he does not, for example, go on to argue from this
dogmatic rationalist position that the basis of political life is the
tule of the rational man over his irrational fellows.* There can be
no arbitrary source of power of one man over another, not even a
source in Revelation, for Divine right has already been disposed of
as not proven. How then does it come about that there is such a
thing as rulership in the world? How is government possible at all?
Locke answers this fundamental question, and it is significant of
his radical individualism that it should ever arise in such an urgent
form, by introducing what he calls a ‘Strange Doctrine’. By this
he may intend to warn us that he is innovating,} but what he says
comes as no great surprise: ‘every one’, he declares, ‘has the Executive
Power of the Law of Nature’ (11, §§ 6, 7, 8, 9, 13). If anyone offends
against the law of nature, everyone else has the right to punish
him for it and exact retribution, not simply for his own damage
but to vindicate the rule ‘of reason and common Equity, which is
that measure God has set to the actions of Men, for their mutual
security’ (1, § 8). We may do so individually, but we may and
must co-operate with other individuals against this ‘trespass
against the whole Species’. On this natural right, which arises out
of humanity itself, is based not simply the right of governing, but
its power as well, for it is a collective power which is used against
an offender even if only one man wields it. The right of governing,
and power to govern, is a fundamental, individual, natural right
and power, set alongside that of preserving oneself and the rest of
mankind (11, §§ 128-30). It is judicial in its nature, for it is the
pronouncing and enforcing of a law, the law of nature which is

_ the law of reason.

The whole of Locke’s political theory is already in view, even

* Though he concedes wide inequality in capacity,
4, t1and references. Locke took a sober, almost a gloomy view of the powers of most of
the human race to follow an argument, to take part in ‘rational society’ at all in its
sophisticated definition, and texts to illustrate this can be found throughout his works, the
Essay especially: the title of ‘optimistic rationalist’ sits oddly upon him. Nevertheless it
does not seem to me justifiable to read into his statements, certainly the statements of Txo
Treatises, any doctrine of differential rationality as has sometimes been done. Strictly the
non-rational man was not a man at all and Locke never denies that any individual can be
rational according to his capacity, he only insists that he is blameworthy if he is not. He
may not be a consistent optimist, but he is no eynic: see Polin, 1961, gon.

T Strauss, 1955, lays some stress on Locke’s use of this phrase, but it seems to me to be
fot much more than a literary device to him. As Strauss points out, Locke’s doctrine on
the point differs only by a twist of emphasis from that of Pufendorf and Cumberland.

reasoning capacity, see note on 1, §

97


INTRODUCTION

tion of powers. We shall make

= ie . ee ic ecskiet ae executive power of
—— ; Tues under the title of a doctrine, the am
ic “8 of natural political virtue. Dogmatically presented as a
k saiaemanen no demonstration of its truth is offered ie itis
implied ina ticular provision of the law of nature as oe
rm “ia al nature generally. This is the right and - oO
ase ie preserve himself and everybody else as muc! =
enible, wbidk is the only law of nature used in such a wes
ocerecumneti when first viewed from this position, 1s aes se
‘ i who by being Magistrate, hath the common f

ees ena ms his hands’ (11, § 11). But we vo yoke
oe ched the stage of established government. All the cl “ea
istics of men, and the relationship between them, whic
have discussed so far belong to the state of nature.

The state of nature is simply the condition in which the execu-

tive power of the law of nature remains exclusively in the hands of
iv

individuals and has not been made communal. It a

it was the original condition of all humanity, be
= lished and permanent collective authority is found, it
es eel to be the result of men taking Pele ey ame
Acie arrangements to secure and establish ¢ —7 ae
rationality and the provisions of ee ae ae : ag
pectin ve se ee a encnait is everywhere aust
ae au, § 101, compare I, §§ 144, 145) and ae | ei
tribes are known to be living now without governm'

istorical and anthropological facts
nearly so. But although these mersaae tae

i tant, demonstrating as thi me
pean do live with each other in the state of nature, it is —
more significant that states themselves, and heads of = he
related to each other in no other way, now oF net _—
King of France and the King of England can si es : aig a
i € the world, so as to preserve man i
ment MEN but each is individually executing the law of

i hich we have described,
icular attitude to the law of nature wl : 00)
: Re ee ecuet heoeiiel ‘and he never relates one law of ae vee ae rai
Sou se of preservation is ae Spareagee Pog nee baled 3 oe gees
including a passage in his Edvcation.
el oaiieal ie writer, much more so than Hobbes

98

THE EXECUTIVE POWER OF THE LAW OF NATURE

nature: there is no institution or authority for the purpose. This
fact, and the persistence of areas of the earth in the state of
nature, may also put private individuals into this state with each
other even now. Such are the Swiss and the Indian bargaining for
truck in the woods of America (11, § 14).*
The state of nature, therefore, has obvious disadvantages; it is
to be expected that men will do their best to ‘replace it, and we
have seen that they are constituted in such a way that they are
perfectly well able to do so. For the state of nature leaves every man
judge in his own case (11, § 13). He has the law of nature to guide
him, but this law is unwritten, ‘no where to be found but in the
minds of Men’, so that ‘they who through Passion or Interest shall
mis-cite, or mis-apply it, cannot so easily be convinced of their
mistake where there is no establish’d Judge’ (11, § 136). But this
does not mean that the state of nature is a state of war, ‘however
some Men’, meaning Hobbes, ‘have confounded’ them (ur, § 19).
War, in fact, is not a state but an incident, although a ‘sedate setled
Design’ on life makes it permissible to use ‘state’ in describing it (11,
§ 16). War is indeed an incident apparently inseparable from human
life, because it is the appeal to God in cases where men cannot settle
things reasonably, and we have to recognize that such a final appeal
is always a possibility even within highly developed political
society, a possibility which has important consequences, It is to be
expected that war should be much closer to the surface in a state of
nature, as witness the frequency and importance of war in the
international state of nature, but this cannot mean that war
describes the state of nature, or that it is otherwise relevant to the
distinction between the state of nature and the state of society.

‘In the beginning all the World was America’ (1, § 49) anda
complete account of human development would show us that in
the primitive, patriarchal, Old Testament stage in Europe we once
lived as the American Indians now do (see notes on 1, § 130and 144,

* The scattered references to primitive societies in Two Treatises, with the more
extensive discussion in the Essay, cover an enormous amount of reading, a perpetual
Preoccupation and an intellectual dilemma. (See Laslett, 1965 (ii).) Locke may be said to
have done more than anyone else to found the study of comparative anthropology, and he
was well aware that the evidence did not demonstrate a ‘state of nature’ of the sort he
described in his political theory. Once more, then, he had to take up a stance towards the
problem. We may believe that this was his position: natural men cannot be proved to have
lived universally in comparative peace, in immanent sociability, but the evidence does not

make such an assumption impossible, and it certainly does not make it necessary to assume
that he lives in a state of war.

99


INTRODUCTION

27-34). In fact this condition of living together —— ‘° a
i jor on earth, in mutual assistance, 4
without a common superior pio “ “
i niversal backgrou:
i servation (1, § 19), is the ui
oie see hould be und: d. It tells us what
i i e understood.
against which government shou ; ell
en is and what it does by showing us what it is oe and
iat it does not do.* It even makes it possible to on =
ernm: , i : chy’, for
oper ones. ‘Absolute Monarciy’,
forms of gov ent from improper naeneron
ample, is ‘i i ith Civil Society, and so can be no
example, is ‘inconsistent wi sae
ivi . It must be so, because a
Civil Government at all’ (1, § 9°) ;
monarch is judging in his own case, as all ~ must in _ pri .
i f him the whole society
nature, Therefore in respect © ‘ erage: a
i i : over he is substituting the
itself in a state of nature; more et
ill, hi ill, for the rule of reason clot
force and will, his force and will, ; thed
natural law. But this does not mean that there is no peace, nO os
no means of social and political co-operation within the —, 7
rules, any more than the international state of nature pr i
international peace and co-operation. For men are not like gaat
state of nature is already social and political. The state of so ae
never completely transcends the state of nature: the contras'
never complete. ; _
These Cooaideniers undoubtedly complicate Locke’s view he
the state of nature, but the complication te _ ee
i in his system for elements 3
realism and allows room in ie anrueapres
i d from the individualist a!
ed to be absent from him an
eunes + At the point we have now reached, however, pen
the question arises why it should be that = ore pe ease a
society, he su ly depa
a state of nature to a state of : resin
i i d medieval. Although s
his predecessors, classical ani . See |
is i i Ithough his individual is perfectly
nature is inconvenient, and al h
capable of transcending it and we can already see why he —_ -
fellows should wish to do so, Locke introduces here a motive for :
* This is the analytic function of this concept in the Political bog = y
‘odern times, and can be criticized as the error of supposing that \t oer
porns is historically previous and institutionally basic. That Loe hegre cae
i implications is yan by his seine sah hd do yee oo bas . paoheryp
i and the ition of 5
ae pealineee 7 Fa couseask which he draws between the two states makes
i ulnerable than his predecessors. . _
" nr uae sate with its immanent sociability and its ras ear A ee
dependence on his fellows, does in a sense incorporate the Aristotelian = le. pine
1961, 174, for the sheoretical as distinct com te ~ hee of Se rc Hae
i i iability); Seliger, 1968, pp. 108, 122, Cf » 198
gel Se are mals inane ps of Locke's position for contemporary political
1969. Rau, 1987,
purposes.

100

THE STATE OF NATURE

establishment of political society which few had considered in the
context of political origins, and none had given much prominence.
He abruptly injects into the discussion the concept of property.
Property generally is justified ethically in Locke’s system by

arguments not unlike those of the other thinkers of the time. Man-
kind’s right to the goods of nature derives from God’s grant in
the Scriptures, from man’s rationality, from the fundamental
natural law of self-preservation (11, § 25 on, 1, §§ 86, 87). But on
these grounds it is man as a species which has a right to own
things, not an individual man. This means that the goods of
nature were originally common, both because the Bible says so,
and because universal freedom and equality must mean original
communism. Locke and his fellows were in some difficulty in
accounting for the fact that this original communism had given
way to private property. They could and did argue from occu-

Pancy, ‘findings is keepings’, but in the end this must imply

consent. In fact, as Filmer had argued with ingenuity and force,

the only way out of original communism was to assume that in

some way or other every individual in the world had consented to
every act of property acquisition.

Locke’s solution to the problem was to lay it down that ‘every
Man has a Property in his own Person’ so that ‘the /abour of his
Body, and the Work of his Hands’ are his. Therefore whatsoever
‘he removes out of the State that Nature hath provided, and left it
in, he hath mixed his Labour with . . . and thereby makes it his
Property (11, § 27). This famous passage, which almost contradicts
his first principle that men belong to God, not themselves, to-
gether with the general claim that “tis Labour indeed that puts the
difference of value on every thing? (11, § 40) are perhaps the most
influential statements he ever made.* Property so acquired was
not unlimited, for it was confined originally to what a man and
his family could consume or use, and must not be wasted (11, § 36).
It extended to the land as well as to the fruits of it (1, §§ 32-40),
but even in this form it must never be used as an instrument of
oppression, as a means of getting others to submit to your will
(1, §§ 42-3). The whole argument is intended to show that indivi-
dual property did not arise from the common consent of all

* See note on 1, § 27 for Tyrrell’s very similar passage, possibly however sug-
gested to him by Locke, and note on u, § 28 for a further discussion of Locke as an
innovator in this matter. It cannot be proved to have been entirely original to Locke,
and is close to the traditional dogma that a labourer had an inalienable right to his
tools. Polin, 1960, 255, prints a further reference to property and justice, and Olivecrona,
1974 (i) (ii), places Locke’s theory in its natural law context.

101 é


INTRODUCTION

i in the end the actual distribution of it is held to
<a sane which is a matter of consent, perhaps =
worldwide consent.* In the state of nature, then, the exertions o
men and above all their invention of money had a a them al
into relationships with each other which were not those o ee
and conscious co-operation but sprang from their . ne
contact, almost physical — = ~ world of material things
— ir property as thus defined.

ee ted to leave the state of nature and to set up
a source of power ‘for the Regulating and Preserving of oe ie
(1, § 3). As the Second Treatise goes on, more and more ap a
is laid on the ‘great and chief end. . . of Mens uniting into Comm _
wealths, and putting of themselves under Government, 7
Preservation of their Property. To which in the state of aes her
are many things wanting.’{ Meanwhile it has become 0° ae
that Locke’s account of the origin of property cannot be intende :
to cover all meanings of the word. For it is not defined as a
possessions, nor in units of the conveniences or necessities =
but much more generally as ‘Lives, Liberties and Estates, w :
I call by the general name, Property’ (1, § cine in “
chapter on property, and in other cases where it is d lear in
material possessions are meant, the word property” in he
Second Treatise is usually to be read in this sense. It is the une in
which Locke’s contemporaries could talk of the protestant religion
established by law as their ‘property’, and Richard Baxter maintain
that ‘men’s /ives and Liberties are the chief parts of their Propriety
though he, like Locke, sought the origin of ‘propriety ina man's
ei moreover, scems to give the political quality to
personality. A slave lacks all political rights because he is in-

especially ll. 20-2 and note, 11, § 50, ete. — :
: z Ge mee ts § 94, 22-3 and note there on Tyrrell’s similar statement:
% : -
ig hasta, Oe this wider definition are listed in the note to u, § 87, 5: it =_y
be noteworthy that at least two of the contexts (those in §§ 123 and 173) were possibly
ii ilies « saty? “
i Benes, 1680, passage noted under ut, § 27. ‘Propriety’ and Le aries
have the same meaning, or combination of meanings, in Locke and in a
nie Locke occasionally substituted the second for the first in correcting his yee
(e.g. in title to ist Treatise, chapter vu). The extended meaning i ey =
noticed occasionally (Gough, 1950; Brogan, 1959) but I owe to the late Professo:

102

THE THEORY OF PROPERTY

capable of property: despotical power, not properly political at
all, can only be exercised over the propertyless (1, § 174). We
well may complain that Locke does not make it sufficiently clear
which definition of property he is using in which context. But the
fact that he was prepared to allow material property, labour-
mixed-with-natural-objects property, to stand for many or all the
abstract rights of the individual does help us to understand why
the concept as a whole enters into his account of the foundation of
civil society.

For property to Locke seems to symbolize rights in their con-
crete form, or perhaps rather to provide the tangible subject of
an individual’s powers and attitudes. It is because they can be
symbolized as property, something a man can conceive of as
distinguishable from himself though a part of himself, that a man’s
attributes, such as his freedom, his equality, his power to execute
the law of nature, can become the subject of his consent, the sub-
ject of any negotiation with his fellows. We cannot alienate any
part of our personalities, but we can alienate that with which we

_ have chosen to mix our personalities.* Whether Locke’s mind was
“working quite in this way or not, it is clear from what he says
elsewhere about civil as opposed to spiritual society that it can
only concern itself with ‘civil concernments’, which on examina-
tion seem to be identical with ‘property’ in its extended meaning
inthe Second Treatise.t In some way, then, itisthrough the theory of
Property that men can proceed from the abstract world of liberty
and equality based on their relationship with God and natural law,
to the concrete world of political liberty guaranteed by political
arrangements.

To see a symbolic system in a writer so down-to-earth as Locke,

Princeton the demonstration that the extended meaning is to be taken as a normal usage both
for Locke and his contemporaries. Professor Viner communicated an unpublished paper on
the subject, which was printed in part, but not in full, in Viner, 1963. Locke’s extraordinary
vagueness about the use of this term is well illustrated by the phrase used at 11, 131, 6.

* The conventional judgment of Locke’s view of property, that it described a
natural, inalienable right, seems on this view to be exactly wrong. Property is
precisely that part of our attributes (or, perhaps to be pedantic, that attribute of our
attributes) which we can alienate, but only of course by our own consent. | differ here from
Olivecrona who takes property to be an extension of the personality. .

t See passages cited in note on u, § 3 from Locke on Toleration. His whole
argument on that subject is intended to prove that the subjective world of religious
conviction is completely inaccessible to the objective world of ‘civil concernments’,
of property in fact.

103


INTRODUCTION

however, may be to read more than should be read into an expedient
forced upon him by the necessity of replying to Sir Robert Filmer.
Property, both in the narrow and in the extended sense, is in-
sufficiently protected and inadequately regulated in the state of
nature and this is the critical inconvenience which induces men to
‘enter into Society to make one People, one Body Politick under
one Supreme Government . . - by setting up a Judge on arth with
Authority to determine all Controversies’ (11, § 89). It is critical
only in the cumulative sense, for it is to be added to the love and
want of society (11, § 101) and to the danger of aggression from
abroad (11, § 3) as well as to all the other inconveniences which
arise from men being judges in their own cases, and which are so
considerable that it can be said that ‘God hath certainly appointed
Government to restrain the partiality and violence of Men’ (11,
§ 13). Once this stage is reached, Locke’s political principle can be
written out in full, But before this is done, we should perhaps
review Locke’s theory of property a little further since it has been
the subject of so much criticism and misunderstanding.*

‘God gave the World . . . to the use of the Industrious and
Rational’, says he (11, § 34), gave it to them in the state of nature
that is, and appointed government also as a remedy for the
inconveniences of that state. For by their very industriousness
and rationality these people created inconveniences for themselves
and the rest of mankind, setting up relationships between men
through their ever-more-complicated contact with material things
which defeated the control of individuals acting as lone executors
of the law of nature. Conscious, co-operative control was set up,
therefore, under governments where ‘the Laws regulate the right
of property, and the possession of land is determined by positive
constructions’ (11, § 50).

This regulation of property and determination of landowner-
ship by political authority is not easy to interpret from Locke’s
text. His object seems to be to guarantee secure and quiet posses-
sion, however large the estate and whatever it contained. In spite
of the statements presenting the ‘labour theory of value’, it would
be extremely difficult to argue that he had any sort of doctrine in
mind which we should call socialist. Nevertheless he never contra-

* Locke’s doctrine of property has been extensively discussed: see, ¢.g- Larkin, 1930:
Czajkowski, 19413 Kendall, 1941 (the first to criticize the ‘individualist’ interpretation);
Gough, 1950; Strauss, 1953; Cherno, 19573 Pietranea, 1957; Monson, 1958; Polin, 1960;
Viano, 1961 (Locke’s theory and Shaftesbury’ policy); Macpherson 1951 and 1962; Dunn,

1967 (ii)and 1969; Milam, 1967; Olivecrona, 1974(i),(ii)and 1975; Tully, 1980; Wood, 1984.

104

THE MEANINGS OF PROPERTY

dicts the assertion he made in 1667, that the magistrate can appoint
ways of transferring properties from one man to another, and make
what property laws he likes, provided they are equitable.* In § 90 of
the First Treatise he clearly implies that the community always had a
residual interest in property and even an original right to it, for the
possessions of an intestate without kin revert to the communi
- ae id
ven the minutest control of property by political i
be reconciled with the doctrine of Toe "Tate. The ote he
defends is never confined to substantial possessions, or bola on
as what we (not Locke) call capital. He hints that even the poorest
has enough to need society’s protection for it (11, § 94 and note). If
not complete communism, certainly redistributive taxation,
perhaps nationalization could be justified on the principles we have
discussed: all that would be necessary is the consent of the majority
- the re —— and constitutionally expressed, and such a
‘w would hold even if al i
ee Il the property-owners were in the
On the other hand the whole tenor of his argument is in favour
of those with a great deal to lose. It may be felt that his anxiety
to make Property tights independent of the universal consent of
all mankind, even though property distribution through money is
subject to ity represents an interest more cogent than the necessity
of answering Filmer. The same preoccupation with the absolute
security of material property may be seen in the confusion left b’
his dual definition of the concept. If he was prepared to allow al
his references to be taken in the sense of material possessions, then
his whole position looks very like an uncompromising defence of
wealth and its power. If it is permissible to look on his use of the
concept ‘property’ as symbolic, as has been suggested, then the
symbolic system seems to express all human rights as market
commodities. He is perfectly willing to contemplate the con-
tinuous or permanent appropriation of the product of one man’s
Jabour by another, a servant’s by a master. Slave labour in no
= ns rll a seenoteonit, § 120. Dunn, 1960(i)p. 36, dissents from this
i ea *onp. ior aor .
erson, 1951, 5 it i
dat «mac shi dnnse tra soem othe pepauay io sod ant f cane
rat panning &. 564) that “Locke has separated life and labor’. When Locke
ge relationship in u, § 85, he uses the word ‘service’ not ‘labour’,

and though he seems specific enough i i i
o seer gh in 11, § 28, 16-26 in making the i
servant’s labour, it is not clearly a matter of a wage relationship: see este ea Si

105


INTRODUCTION

way perturbs him: a reading of § 130 of the First Treatise leaves a
modern believer in the enormity of personal servitude very
uncomfortable, if not indignant. He fails to make any specific
provision against the obvious consequences of allowing unlimited
accumulation of precious stones, metals and money in all its forms,
once consent had given them value. }.
Nevertheless it is gratuitous to turn Locke's doctrine of pro-
perty into the classic doctrine of the ‘spirit of capitalism , what-
ever that may be. It can only be done by explaining away all the
statements which he makes about the origin and limitations of
property as obstacles to his true meaning. All that he says about
‘regulating’ property, even though this is the first word he uses
about it when it is introduced into the Second Treatise (1, § 3), has
to be ignored. Half-conscious traditionalism or plain hypocrisy
must be held to account for Locke’s description of unlimited
acquisitiveness as “amor sceleratus habendi, evil Concupiscence’ (a,
§ 111). Above all it has to be done by denying point blank that
Locke’s consistent claim, “The Obligations of the Law of Nature,
cease not in Society, but only in many Cases are drawn closet’ qa,
§ 135), can apply to property.* If we are prepared to treat historical
texts in such a way we can prove just what we like from them.
In fact, of course, Locke was neither a ‘socialist? nor a ‘capi-
talist’, though it is fascinating to find clements of both attitudes of
ours in his property doctrine—more, perhaps, in what he left out
or just failed to say than in the statements themselves. He was not
even an advocate of land and landownership as the basis of
political power, to be ‘represented’ in a nation’s counsels. For all
the intellectual and political influence which he wielded in the
eighteenth century he was in these respects a barren field for
anyone who wished to justify what once was called the Whig

* , 20: see p. 246 for his reference to the spirit of capitalism. The case for
Cocke ob Beery pial is presented with far greater exactness and subtlety by
Macpherson, 1962, from @ point of view which scorns ‘petty bourgeois socialism’ .
Interesting as it is, Strauss’s view seems to be based on so arbitrary a textual reading, one
so much concerned to discover a ‘real’ meaning (generally a Hobbesist or a capitalist one),
that it is quite unacceptable to an editor of Two Treatises, for a critique, see Yolton, 1958.
Macpherson’s close and revealing analysis clarified the issues remarkably, but it would
seem that he could only have come to his thoroughly unrealistic and occasionally
unhistorical conclusions because he set out to demonstrate that Locke's object could only
have been to ‘provide the ideological support for capitalist appropriation’. Ryan, 1965,
analyses Macpherson’s position with great acuteness, and Dunn, 1967 (ii), prints new
evidence on Locke’s view of the just price.

106

CRITIQUE OF LOCKE ON PROPERTY

oligarchy. But he did use his property doctrine to give con-
tinuity to a political society, to join generation to generation.

Locke’s doctrine of property was incomplete, not a little confused
and inadequate to the problem as it has been analysed since his day,
lacking the humanity and the sense of social co-operation to be
found in the canonists who had preceded him.

We should not in fact expect it to be wholly developed and
coherent, a doctrine of property at large, because close working of
his text seems to confirm what several commentators have
suggested. This is that Locke’s primary and overriding interest was
in taxation, arbitrary taxation and its iniquities, not in property as a
subjectinitself. Heis naturally led to discuss the nature of property,
but a general theory of ownership was not his intellectual object.
This in spite of the remark cited at the outset of this Introduction. We
must surely recognize nevertheless that the doctrine of property he
did sketch out wasan original doctrine, particularly importantinits
bearing on the way men analysed social and political origins, and
his own judgment on it must stand—no man has ever quite done
this before or since.

We are now in a position to follow Locke’s political principle
through to its conclusion. Men may enter into society quite sud-
denly, and it is perhaps best to assume that any given company
actually decided at some point in time to change their condition to
this new state. But there can be degrees of ‘community’, a variety
of ways in which political authority can be founded, and even

apparently permanent conditions which cannot be called one or
the other state. The most usual development is in fact patriarchal,
where a large family grows into a political society and its heredi-
tary head gives rise to a royal lineage. But this must not lead us
into the mistake of supposing that patriarchal is political power, or
to confuse the relation of man and wife, parent and child, master
and servant, with the political relation. However political power
comes into being, it can only be looked’on as the formation of a
community by a band of rational creatures, all with the power to
punish transgression of the law of nature and offences against their
property. Any number of them can exercise the power collectively,
and they can replace their patriarchs or make their generals itito
elective kings as and when they please. The unmistakable sign of
civil society having come into being is when every individual has re-
signed up to the society or the public his individual power to exercise

107


INTRODUCTION

the law of nature and protect his property. This is the social compact
and it is fair to everybody, since everybody makes the same sacrifice
for the same benefits. It sets up a judge on earth, with authority
to determine all the controversies and redress the injuries that may
happen to any member of the commonwealth, as it is now called.

‘All this will be done by consent, the consent of every individual

concerned. The judge thus established will be a legislative power,
able to pronounce on offences because it can promulgate settled,
standing rules in accordance with the law of nature; rules, or laws,
which are indifferent, and so fair to everybody, guaranteeing,
defining and giving substance to everybody’s freedom. ‘To sanc-
tion those laws and judgments, this ‘legislative’, as we may call it,
will have at its disposal the mingled force of all the members of
society—and ‘executive’ power in fact. It will have a third power
in virtue of the condition in which the community finds itself, a
power of protection from foreign enemies and of communication
with other such communities and with individuals in a state of
nature. This is the ‘federative’ power. It will not need a separate
judicial power, because, we have seen, the pronouncing of judg-
ment is its general function. These three powers are distinct in
themselves, and the executive and legislative are best kept in
separate hands, except that the head of the executive may be a part
of the legislative, with power of summons and prorogation. But
there can be no doubt of the ultimate superiority of the legislative
in the constitution.

Its establishment, and the form of government generally, are
‘the fundamental Appointment of the Society’, the Constitution
as we should say (11, § 214). The original compact which set it
up will imply majority rule, for the state is not simply a rightful
power, it is a collective body, and a body which can only move
on the side of the greater mass. Its gravitational logic requires
that those who are a part of it shall not resist its final direction.
Political power, now that it has arrived, will not be special in the
sense that it is different from the power all men continue to exercise
in preserving the law of nature where their governors cannot, or
by agreement must not, intervene. It will be special only in the
sense that it is collective, and so cannot be an attribute, least of all
the property, of a single man or family. Every effort must be made
to ensure that those who wield it shall never develop an interest
separate from that of the community, the people. Any individual

108

THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF THE STATE

born outside the community is free to join it, or born inside can
decide to leave for another community, or even to live in some part
of the world still in a state of nature. When he is within the com-
— he must accept the rulership of its governors and obey its
ws. .

But the governors are only entrusted with the power they have.
Government comes into being at the same time and perhaps by the
same act as that which established civil society, but its power is

given for atining.an.end and limited 10 If that end should be
‘aigiocosl she govesncoent ie dleolved sod te Powe! devolves to
the people, or to the community which is al o0s one. Now this does
not restore a state of nature, or it does not necessarily do so. The
people under these circumstances may themselves act as a ‘legis-

lative’, and_so-maintain_government, but it is likely that after a
very short while they will set up new ees for government, or
change the form and conditions of governing. It is for the people
only to decide whether or when ther gowsmmenrl ites have
Ge conde eee ee
and for the people as a wi ire_in any dispute
between the governors and a partor their body: If the governors
resist such judgment, or behave in any way Which threatens that
the people will cease to be a community and become a confused
multitude, then the state of nature is at hand, with all its disad-
vantages. This will seldom, perhaps never, happen for the people
can be relied upon to be patient and long-suffering. If such an
extreme situation does come about, and the question arises of who
is to be the final judge, the answer brings us back to where Locke
began. There is no final judge of these things on earth, the ulti-
mate appeal can only be to God.

This is the major‘ theme of Locke on Government,* and it is
extended into a discussion of conquest, tyranny and other related
subjects. It will be seen that the theme as a whole does develop
out of the assertion that each individual possesses the executive
power of the law of nature. We may look on his intention as
being to lay down a doctrine in this way, a doctrine which we shall
call that of natural political virtue. This would seem to be, the
most probable and sympathetic reading of the book, though’ not
all that is said is quite consistent with it.

* It has had to be interpreted somewhat for purposes of straight ition;
below for trust, dissolution of government, etc. : ie a

109


